### Legal

The data used in our product was obtained from the gov website, the links can be found here: https://coronavirus.data.gov.uk/cases and https://coronavirus.data.gov.uk/death . Specifically, we used data referring to information referring to cumulative cases by specimen date, cumulative deaths 28 days by death date, new cases by specimen data, and new deaths 28 days by death date. This information is available to the wider public, free of charge. The government website states, "The dashboard is an up-to-date and authoritative summary of key information about the COVID-19 pandemic". The website also states that "all content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated", the link to the licensing document can be found here: https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/?_ga=2.119042496.815297169.1646927109-1705935174.1646927109. Under this licensing you can freely copy, publish, distribute and transmit the Information; adapt the Information; exploit the Information commercially and non-commercially for example, by combining it with other Information, or by including it in your own product or application. And you must, where appropriate acknowledge the source of the information in your product or application by including or linking to any attribution statement specified by the Information Provider(s) and, where possible, provide a link to this license.

We only used one 3rd party library called Apache PDFBox, which is an open-source Java tool for working with PDF documents. Apache PDFBox is produced by The Apache Software Foundation and is licensed according to the terms of the documents linked here: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0. In the document it claims that we have "worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the Work and such Derivative Works in Source or Object form" and "worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable (except as stated in this section) patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Work".

Our software is being made specifically for the NHS, therefore it is not free open-source software. It is a closed-source software because the source code is not available to the public. Therefore, any closed-source licensing would be suitable for our product.

The Data Protection Act 2018 is the UK’s implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). On the UK government website, it states that there 6 strict rules called ‘data protection principles. They must make sure the information is:
- used fairly, lawfully, and transparently
- used for specified, explicit purposes
- used in a way that is adequate, relevant, and limited to only what is necessary
- accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date
- kept for no longer than is necessary
- handled in a way that ensures appropriate security, including protection against unlawful or unauthorized - processing, access, loss, destruction, or damage

All 6 of these rules are relevant to our product and future customers, as all 6 of these rules must be met in order to maintain data protection.

### Ethical

Firstly, it's important to consider ethical issues in software development because software and technology can directly affect people's lives on a personal level and have the power to make them either better or worse.

Covid-19 has negatively affected the entire population and has caused lifelong problems for many people. For example, many people have lost friends and loved ones, many businesses have closed, resulting in millions of people losing their full-time jobs and covid has affected the economy as a whole, just to name a few issues. This, therefore, makes the topic of our software extremely socially sensitive. This means we must handle the data with care, as we don't want to offend anyone or invoke any unnecessary emotions.

An ethical problem to consider regarding our product is security. For example, someone could hack into our software and change the data based on the forecasted covid deaths and cases. Our product is to be used and interpreted by the NHS management team, and it is assumed that they may use the forecasted data to make decisions for the NHS. For example, it can help them effectively distribute key workers to prepare for the anticipated covid related inpatients, as well as prepare enough medical equipment for areas where covid cases are expected to be higher. Therefore, if this forecasted data were to be tampered it could greatly affect the NHS and the country as a whole. This same idea relates to the importance of the validity and reliability of our software. As suggested above, it is vital that the data produced is somewhat accurate otherwise the larger population will be affected. For example, if the number of predicted new cases was heavily underestimated, the public may recieve a lower level of care. As the NHS might not be prepared for the amount of new patients being emitted e.g. they may not have enough beds or equiptment on hand. Therefore, if the forecasted data was inaccurate or lacked validity then it could also affect the NHS and the level of care being provided.

Another ethical problem to consider is a potential bias regarding the representation of the data. Honest and effective data visualization is important as the way the data is visualized can influence how the data is interpreted and can be misleading. This statement is supported by the following research paper (https://web.cs.wpi.edu/~ltharrison/docs/mansoor2017data.pdf). Our product uses data visualization and graphs to represent covid-19 data, therefore, our graphs must reduce as much bias as possible. So that it can be accurately read and interpreted by the NHS management team.

### Health and Safety

It's important to consider health and safety regarding software development and computer/software use in general as this can often be overlooked. But it's vital that we are able to maintain our physical and metal health, so we can produce high quality work.

Firstly, in regard to the final product. The safety of the wider population must be considered. As previously mentioned, if the data forecasted was drastically incorrect, it could lead to inefficient decisions being made within the NHS, concerning the distribution of staff, or equipment prepared for predicted inpatients. Which could affect the quality of healthcare provided to the public. This same idea could be applied to the security aspect, in which if the data were to be tampered with, it could affect the forecasted cases and death. Which would also, in turn, affect the quality of healthcare provided.

Regarding the development of the product, physical health and safety issues have arisen. A poorly set up workstation can create physical discomfort. Such as back pain, limb disorders, or repetitive strain injury. Therefore, it is important to take regular screen breaks of around 5-10 minutes and to change activity every hour, as suggested by the unison. It is also recommended to take regular breaks from looking at a monitor to prevent eye strain and to "position your monitor directly in front of you about an arm's length away so that the top of the screen is at or just below eye level", as suggested by the Mayo Clinic. Therefore, throughout development, we all tried to follow these recommendations to maintain our physical health.

